Hi everyone, I am Peya Mowar, and I am
presenting our work “Breaking the News Barrier:
Towards Understanding News Consumption
Practices among BVI Individuals in India”.
This work was done with Meghna Gupta and Mohit
Jain, who are my amazing colleagues at Microsoft
Research India. Researchers actively study news
consumption practices among different countries,
to analyze their information needs and gauge their
civic engagement. Prior research has highlighted
the struggles of BVI individuals in staying
updated with current news events. And as digital
news access and personalized news discovery become
more prevalent, the preferences and methods of
news consumption among BVI individuals, who are
notably early adopters of AI, have evolved. There
remains a gap in understanding the current digital
news consumption behaviors of BVI individuals,
particularly in Global Southern countries like
India. India is also home to the largest BVI
population worldwide, with approximately 4.95
million blind and 35 million visually impaired
citizens. Still, the enforcement of the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Act often falls short,
leading to persistent accessibility barriers
on numerous websites. India is home to a young
and linguistically diverse population, with 729
million people in India who consume news actively
in Indian languages. Indian news users with
internet access are embracing a mobile-first,
platform-dominated media environment with
search engines, social media, and messaging
applications playing a key role in how people
access news in a setting characterized by low
trust and widespread worries about different
kinds of disinformation. In this study, we
ask three research questions. What drives news
consumption preferences among BVI individuals
in India? What methods and infrastructure do BVI
individuals currently use for interacting with
news sources? And what are the primary barriers
that they encounter in accessing digital news and
their workarounds? We recruited 17 participants
who consumed news in a variety of languages,
with 11 participants consuming news in more than 1
language. We reached out to our participants using
Zoom or Microsoft Teams. We asked them to share
their screen and consume news using their phone,
laptop or tablet. And this session was followed
by semi-structured interviews around their news
consumption practices. All of this data was
analyzed qualitatively using thematic analysis.
Most of our participants claimed their drive to
consume news stemmed from an urge to participate
in meaningful conversations. Our participants
also leaned heavily on the knowledge they acquired
while consuming news to help them achieve their
learning objectives and advance their careers.
On this slide we also have an image depicting
their preferences for devices, media platforms,
and publishing brands. More details are discussed
in the paper. Our participants consumed news in
two ways, by reading and listening. We observed
that our participants preferred text-based
modalities such as apps, website articles and
aggregators when they wanted to engage actively
with news. On the other hand, they liked the
simple navigation offered by audio modalities
such as Google Assistant or Youtube when they were
engaging passively or multitasking. Additionally,
we found that source accessibility was not
the predominant consideration for selecting
news sources among our participants. Rather,
other news quality attributes such as trust,
coverage, and neutrality took precedence in
shaping their consumption practices. Participants
often forwent accessibility requirements to gain
access to topics that held specific interest for
them. Our participants encountered numerous
operational barriers, when accessing news on
digital platforms. The most significant challenge
was the overwhelming presence of ads and popups,
paywalls and other kinds of dynamic and cluttered
content. Our participants often relied on human
infrastructure to overcome these barriers,
such as by reading news from volunteer-driven
e-newspapers. They often downloaded additional
apps such as OCR or ad blockers for assisting
them in accessing news. And some participants
switched to alternatives such as subscribing to
RSS feeds or interacting with voice assistants for
getting access to news. The most profound impact
of the barriers I mentioned before was a lag in
information access. Our participants reported
delays in receiving news, which often resulted in
missed opportunities. Our participants also felt
compelled to stick to known sources, which limited
their exposure to diverse viewpoints. And finally,
they repeatedly expressed sentiments of isolation
and neglect, emphasizing a lack of empathy amongst
news agencies. So, in this work, we found
that the news consumption patterns in the
BVI community diverged from broader trends
with current access to news being, at best,
patchy. More details and discussions can be found
in the paper. Thank you so much for listening.